And we're on.
Okay.
I'm just going to do a slate
first.
Today is November 1st in the year
2024.
I'm Karen Herman, and I'm conducting an
interview with Bart Decrem for the Free
and Open Source Stories Digital Archive Foundation.
It's all a lie.
I can't believe you're starting off with
a bunch of lies.
Okay, so.
It's 1994 people.
Oh, we'll fix it in post.
Um, um, so we're going to start
right from the very beginning.
Where and when were you born?
Oh, 1967 Belgium.
Okay.
It was a tough year.
I think it might have been even
Purple Haze.
Might have been.
I'm not 100% sure of that.
So what was your.
What kind of kid were you?
Oh, I was, I was, I was
a fiddler always, you know, nerding out
and then and then there weren't really
laptops yet to nerd out with.
um, so my first, you know, sort
of earning my stripes, um, in a
recognizable manner was when I was 13,
I started hanging out around the it
was pirate radio at that time back
in Europe.
There's a really fun documentary on it.
I don't know if it's a documentary
movie about sort of the roots of
pirate radio in England and the ships
on the North Sea and all that.
After that sort of, sort of it's
we're right there after we're in the
middle of the punk wave.
Uh, and, and so independent radio, it
was only government run radio at the
time.
We had independent illegal radio.
You'd get shut down by the authorities,
the telecommunication oversight bodies, like they would
literally come in, pound the antennas and
the transmitters.
When I was 13, I started volunteering
there and I made a little magazine,
you know, compiling their Billboard chart and,
and then and then and then that
led to me being doing on air,
um, shows on, on, on, on underground
radio when I was 13, 14, 15.
What attracted you to that?
Uh, well, I've always liked tinkering and
starting stuff and sort of entrepreneuring sort
of like basement entrepreneur, you know, garage
entrepreneurship.
And I've always I've always wanted to
be on the pirate ship, you know,
with the rebels.
Um, and the underdogs.
And so that's sort of a through
line in my, in my career.
It's like an aesthetic and cultural and
philosophical political preference, you know.
What about your family?
Did your, um, were they were they
okay with what you.
Oh, that's what it was.
It was just a reaction against my
parents, who were extremely middle class and
middle class values.
My dad growing up first in his
village to to go to college and
having a very traditional, you know, sort
of company life.
Uh, so I guess I was reacting
against that.
Okay.
So, how did you move to the
United States?
I got kicked out of Catholic school
for being generally a troublemaker and ended
up at an international school, the European
School of Brussels, and really fell in
love with the cosmopolitan vibes and being
exposed to other languages and cultures and
all that betrayed my people.
And as a Flemish kid went to
the French university in Brussels, which is
like, oh my God.
Um, to study political science, because all
my friends moved back to their home
countries all over Europe.
And so I was eager to, uh,
to get out of Dodge and find
another place I really enjoyed.
I had gotten to visit California once
on a free trip sponsored by Hawaiian
Airlines, which is a whole different cool
story.
Um, and, and really just I was
like, oh, wow, I love the weather
and the vibes, as we now say,
uh, and also, I was attracted to
the ethos of Silicon Valley and the
Mac.
The Macintosh had just come out, and
that was the thing I typed all
my college papers on.
And so I so on, if you
want it to be part of that.
And so I ended up, uh, doing
studying law at Stanford.
So did you have one of the
first Macintoshes?
Um, I did not, but to the
Flemish University in Brussels.
They had a whole lab with, uh,
I think there was a mac 512
at the time.
Later on, I did a community work
in East Palo Alto and a guy
named Andy Hertzfeld, who I have a
feeling we'll talk about more, um, was
one of our first supporters, and he
literally dropped off one of each model.
So I think we had like a
macintosh 128 and a 512.
And I think then they went to
the plus.
And so you see the signatures on
the inside of the case, you know,
signed by Steve and Andy and the
rest of the crew.
Uh, so, so that stuff is sort
of burned into my brain.
Yeah.
Okay.
So what did you do once you
got here?
What was your what was your plan?
Uh, my, my my plan was to
stay in school because I really enjoyed
that.
Um, and enjoy the weather and and
and I spent the summer at McKinsey
doing management consulting, and, uh, I thought
I might want to be a diplomat
because I speak, like, six languages or
something.
And, and and still you learn so
much about yourself, right?
As soon as you sort of hit
the battlefield.
So I spent one summer doing professional
services in management consulting, and I really
hated it.
And it was this awful feeling where
you go to work every day and
you're just like, this is not what
I'm supposed to be doing.
Um, but I found what I was
supposed to be doing in East Palo
Alto, which is, um, a low income
community right next to Stanford University.
And I started living there and getting
to know the kids and volunteering, and
I when I graduated, there was this
thing called Echoing Green Foundation, and they
were launching something at that time, completely
new social entrepreneurship.
Uh, they were going to fancy universities
and, and giving fellowships to folks that
want to do community impact work.
And so I spent five years building
plugged In, helping to bridge the digital
divide between East Palo Alto and Silicon
Valley.
As an echoing green fellow.
Okay.
So I never, never took the bar.
Never, never practice law.
Oh.
You didn't.
That's interesting.
Talk a little bit about plugged In.
What exactly what exactly was it?
Um, so I was hanging out with
a lot of community folks.
Um, uh, and, and and black friends
at Stanford and so on, and people
are like, well, you know, if you
you can't just talk about politics, you
got to do something.
And so there was a church in,
in San Francisco called Glide Memorial Church
that is still very well known.
And they had a computer program.
It was called computers and you.
And I was like, oh, that's cool.
I'm interested in computers and I want
to make a difference in the community.
And so I went to the tenderloin
several times and did some volunteering.
And then and then a local community
worker was like, well, you know, there's
kids in East Palo and in Menlo
Park, and I started volunteering at a
boys and girls club and really believed
in the potential of computers to help
improve people's lives.
I've never really lost that irrational optimism,
often irrational optimism.
Um, and so when we launched Plugged
In, it was, how can we bring
technology to folks that don't have access
to them in a meaningful way?
And so for kids early on especially,
that meant sort of, you know, like
math apps and stuff, sort of like
the 1990s version of Duolingo.
Um, but very quickly we moved to
storytelling, you know, like, hey, let's use
these tools to make drawings and record
audio and video and tell stories.
And that, you know, that sort of
felt more interesting very quickly to myself
and the other folks for teenagers.
A guy named Louis Rossetto had just
launched a magazine called The Wired, and
the phone rang one day.
And he was he was like, hey,
how can we help you?
We'll run an ad for your thing.
And so we're like, well, what's the
ad going to be for?
What's the call to action?
And we started a teen run web
design business where kids were building websites
for folks that were reading wired magazine,
and that worked out really well.
And then for adults, it ended up
being, here's a Kinko's.
You know, you can come in here
and look for jobs and type up
your resume and do what you need
to do.
And it was sort of a drop
in facility.
So it was a number of ways
of looking at how can we have
the internet and computers.
Um, how can we provide meaningful access
that, that that helps people achieve their
goals in life?
Yeah, this is pretty early on.
This is like 1999, 2000.
Yeah, 1992, 1999.
Right there when the internet was happening
and mosaic came out and I remember,
you know, Hotmail coming out and Hotmail
founder coming by to do a piece
on how having email on a web
browser was amazing.
It would change everybody's life and all
that.
And how do you think your experience
with Plugged In influenced the rest of
your career choices as you were moving
forward because you had a law degree
and now.
I think it got me to focus
on doing something, and it got me
to focus on the sort of belief
that, you know, like you wake up
in the morning and you read TechCrunch,
or maybe now it's The Verge, right?
And you're excited about the new technology
and you believe it can build a
better world.
Um, what are you going to do
about it?
You know, or you wake up anxious
about the election and oh my God,
Trump might win.
Well, what are you going to do
today?
I think it got me into that
mindset of don't just like something, you
like something and then do something.
Uh, and so, um, I've always believed
in the positive potential of technology, and
I don't think I've been completely blind
to the to the risks and downsides.
And so it's like a practice of
like a through line in my career
has been trying to practice that, trying
to look for opportunities that technology can
help improve folks lives?
Um.
Bring us together.
Um, all of that.
Yeah.
And so.
So around that time, too, you also
co-founded easel.
Yes.
So, so so the next thing that
happened is our biggest contributor when we
were doing Plugged In, was a guy
that would just send a check every
year.
And I got to know him.
And his name was Andy Hertzfeld.
And he used a really interesting and
colorful person and very well known in
the area because he was part of
the original band of Pirates with Steve
Jobs.
Uh, there's a famous, I believe it's
Time magazine cover of the team that
built the Macintosh with Steve and and
Andy and a number of other folks,
and Andy had built much of the
original operating system, the finder and other
stuff around it for for the Mac.
Uh, and he was a big fan
of what we were doing and supported
us and brought in all these Macintoshes
for a little baby computer museum in
the office.
Um.
And one day Andy.
And then.
And then I decided it was time
to move on.
Uh, that I had done my thing
there.
Guy named Avram Miller, who was head
of business development and corporate partnerships at
Intel, was like, hey, you've done all
you can do here.
Go do something else.
He was right.
And so I and I left and
caught up with Andy Hertzfeld and said,
what should I do next?
And he's like, well, I've seen the
light.
And I was like, what's the light?
And he's like, the light is software
should be free.
He didn't say it that extreme.
Um, but but but, um, here's how
we get into open source.
Andy, after having built, uh, worked at
Apple, um, built, uh, scanning software that
would work with dot matrix printer.
It would.
It's this sort of miraculous software if
you if you sort of transplant yourself
back to 1990, where you have a
dot matrix printer and all of a
sudden it's a scanner, you know, mind
blown, which it still is.
That's still like an incredible trick.
I still can't quite explain how that
would work, but he built that because
that's the kind of guy Andy is
and made a livelihood as an indie.
Now we call him an indie dev.
Um, and was making money selling his
software.
$20, you know, a pop.
And a guy named Richard Stallman came
knocking on his door one day, as
Andy told me the story and said,
you need to set your software free.
It needs to be licensed under the
GPL.
And Andy said, what the hell is
the GPL?
And why would I want to do
it and get out of my house?
I'm in publishing for, um, for color.
For color?
Um, but but no.
Richard Stallman was trying to convince Andy
about the benefits of free software, and
Andy was like, well, I'm making money
selling software.
That doesn't make sense.
And he's like, but but I got
to realize that that Richard Stallman was
right.
And that specifically when it comes to
the operating system and at the time,
in the way that we've been talking
about Google and the other tech, you
know, Uh, tech powers.
Uh, at that time, you know, the
big one by far was Microsoft.
And they were really our gateway to
all of computer technology and the internet.
Uh, until we get to Firefox.
Um, and, and Andy was like, this
is gatekeeper technology for the entire planet,
and this should be part of the
commons in the way that, you know,
the phone system is, is a utility.
Uh, and there's rules around, you know,
keeping that open to all.
And so Andy was convinced that the
operating system should not be controlled, you
know, as a gateway to the world
of computers.
And the internet should not be controlled
by one company.
And that's the argument for, for Linux
and the GPL, uh, open sourcing of
Linux.
And so Andy was like, I've seen
the light.
Software should be free, at least the
operating system.
And there needs to be an alternative
to windows.
And it exists.
It's called Linux, but it needs to
be made user friendly.
And so, uh, let's go start a
company, Bart.
And we started a company called easel
that set out to make Linux user
friendly.
Yeah.
And what was your role in that?
I was the junior founder, errands boy.
I was like, running around.
It was my first startup.
I'd never done anything.
And with Andy.
So I wrote the business plan, which
is just things that I was typing
for three weeks.
But really, what happens when you do
a startup is you have a big
idea and then you build energy around
it.
And so the business plan, I mean,
it's good because it shows that somebody
is doing, you know, Google searches on
stuff.
You know, I don't know if that
was a thing back then.
It was actually because it was 1999.
Um, but, but, but my role was
to run around and be sort of
a source of energy.
But very early on, a guy named
Mike Homer, uh, got excited, and he
had run all of business affairs for
Netscape and had had sort of done
the trench warfare with Microsoft over Internet
Explorer and Netscape.
And he was he got involved like
a co-founder really, and board chair.
And he was fantastic.
Mike Boyd had coined the term evangelist.
Um, uh, hired Guy Kawasaki into Apple
and he became the Mike became the
CEO.
So I was like the random guy
that didn't know anything but had a
lot of energy.
Um, and, um, the team that we
built, Excel, Mitch Kapor, ended up on
our, on our board of directors.
So that takes us back to Mozilla
as well.
Um, um, and the team we assembled
was to this day, it was it
was really an exceptional team.
Uh, the the folks that we worked
with did all kinds of things, but
they went on and built much of
the iPhone, uh, operating software.
Uh, much of Safari was built by
folks from easel.
Uh, much of Passkeys, which is one
of my very favorite technologies right now,
was built by under under Darren Adler,
who was our, uh, lead engineer at
Eazel.
He was an amazing team, in particular
on the engineering side.
Oh, and then there was also a
tribble was also involved.
And Bud had been the co-founder of
next, uh, with Steve Jobs.
And so, so Andy and Bud would
sit around the office telling war stories
with with Susan Kerr, and every now
and then Arlo Rose and they'd be
telling all these Steve Jobs stories.
Uh, there's a website called Folklore.org, uh,
run by Andy that tells that captures
a lot of stories of the early
days of Apple in particular.
That's great.
So so, you know, you're working with
a not an open source, um, business
plan.
How how are you looking to create
a business out of it in terms
of money making?
Well, it was sort of the same.
Keep it.
One of my fatal flaws is, I
mean, I'm smart enough, but but I
tend to use that to overthink stuff.
Like, one of the, one of the
things that one of the professional, uh,
impediments that you might develop as a
with a law degree is that you
sort of see 14 arguments on each
side.
And there's a counterargument to everything.
And it goes back and forth and
there's an intellectual curiosity and all that,
you know, and seeing multiple sides.
I tend to make stuff way too
complicated.
And so I found in my career,
let's say, most of the things that
I've worked on have failed.
The things that have not failed are
usually things where I just kept it
really simple, like meat and potatoes, like,
oh, I built a game called Tap
Tap Revenge.
It's Guitar Hero on the iPhone.
It's free.
I mean, it's such a simple idea.
You know, an angry alligator that bangs
on pipes.
A billion users for where's My water
at, Disney?
Um, the simple, simple idea for easel
was, um, there should be a free
alternative.
There's a thing called Linux.
Let's make it easy to use.
There's a billion people with computers.
That number, hopefully, is going to go
up some more.
When you're sitting there and you have
a piece of software that a billion
people use, you'll figure out a way
to make money later, which is very
Silicon Valley tech bro kind of thinking.
It also has held up a lot
over the history of of consumer technology.
So if you would if you had
asked me at the time, well, what
does that mean specifically?
I think we were thinking about two
things.
We'll sell a subscription, you know, and
downloads we the idea was that there
would be like a software service that
you can subscribe to.
And then the other big idea, um,
the web browser as a distribution platform
that if you have a browser with
millions of people on it, that's valuable
distribution space, you'll be able to monetize.
And so we got to the specifics
of how that works with Firefox a
few years later.
Um, but but those were the two
ideas at the time.
Like, you can have open software and
there will be people competing with you,
but hopefully you'll have better brand and
and you'll be ahead of them in
time and you'll have great mindshare and
team, uh, and so you'll be all
right.
You know, you might not be as
big as if you had monopoly power
on the software, but you have community
buy in and you'll benefit from other
folks contribution and so on and so
on.
Um, and also where the upstart.
Right.
If the if the if the if
the if the incumbent is worth 100
billion, we'll settle for ten.
Right.
That kind of logic, uh, you know,
is very valid when you're starting to
think.
So that's as far as we've gotten
on the business plan.
And the business itself.
How did it do?
Oh, terrible.
Um, it turns out that, uh, making
Linux easy to use is, uh, something
that we all chase and never achieve.
Um, um, it is, and I've.
And I keep relearning this lesson, you
know, like I've been working in Mastodon.
Um, it's easy to get something.
It's easy to take something to a
usability and polish level that from a
safe distance, looks like you're almost there.
But the last mile is It's very,
very difficult.
And it's like it's not ten x,
it's like 100 x, you know?
That's where all the work is in
the last mile.
And when you don't nail that last
mile, I can give you a demo
and make you feel like you're working
on something good, but when you're using
it, it doesn't do the right thing.
It's kind of like when you're in
Chrome as your operating system, and then
you want to print and all of
a sudden there's no print button and
you're like, what?
What?
Just, you know, like there's no print
here.
This is insane, right?
Those kinds of moments that you can
sort of you don't think of as
a big deal or they don't sort
of hit you up front.
Uh, it's very hard.
Uh, it the, the, the ultimate version
of this is sort of the apple
conclusion of no, no, you got to
own the whole stack from the app,
in your web browser, in the browser,
in the operating system, you know, and
the circuit board and the, you know,
and the CPU, right, that, you know,
um, but but certainly if you're like
all the way over here just shipping
some binary you can get from Download.com
and install this on your computer and
reboot it and hope it still.
Boots up and it'll work out.
Um, that's not going to work.
So making Linux easy to use is
very hard.
Open source has been quite bad at
usability problems.
Could it involve curation and saying no.
Uh, and and having peculiar tastes and
instincts for consumer behaviors, none of which
sort of map very well against the
superpowers of the open source community.
Most open source communities, um, and and
so if you are going to do
that, the correct way to go about
it is Chromebook is that I'm going
to sell you a laptop for $500
that's cheaper than the other one, and
you're living in the browser, and hopefully
you're not going to try to print
too often.
Um, that's the correct answer to making
Linux easy to use, and bringing open
source software to and building an alternative
stack is you just have a $500
device that you sell at, you know,
Best Buy at the time over the
internet.
Now it has different capital requirements and
so on and so on.
There's a reason Google does that, right?
Not all startup.
So did Eazel.
Did it eventually.
What happened to it?
Did it just.
Oh it.
Failed.
It failed in the the oldest crash
that that people saw the workplace, remember?
Um, there was a.com crash of 1999,
2000.
Uh, and so what happened is we
got started in 1999 on Eazel built
a team.
Uh, people were excited about Linux.
There was an IPO of a company
called Linux one, I believe it was
called, and so on.
Uh, and then a year later, the
stock market crashed and Pets.com, you know,
uh, went away and webvan and, and
and this speculative thing called Linux and
building an alternative.
And we'll figure out monetization later.
That's not that wasn't a really good
pitch.
Uh, 12 months later.
So we were unable to secure follow,
follow on funding.
And the company went out of business.
Except that Darren Adler Andy Capp, Cameron
on payroll for like a whole lot
of year out of his personal, uh,
donations.
Andy Hertzfeld kept funding there and Adler.
And so the Nautilus, the software that
we built, kept being improved for at
least another year and then became a
stock part of the gnome, which is
one of the front ends for, for
Linux.
So the work, the work, the code
lived on well beyond the company.
And you and you were part of
GNOME Foundation.
Yes.
I created I was the person herding
cats at the Graham Foundation.
There was, I suspect it was Miguel
de Caza that he had been the
leader of the GNOME project.
Uh, he's still very actively involved in
open source and at Microsoft today.
Uh, and so I think Miguel started
it, uh, the leadership around the GNOME
Foundation.
And I said, how can I help?
And I think one way or another,
I was the person that sort of
helped, um, Come on, put a governance
model.
And I think we created a 501,
C three, and so on and so
on.
And so that it was it was
one of the earlier open source foundations.
And so as you look at the
Mozilla Foundation and the Linux Foundation, there
were sort of the Apache Foundation.
There were 3 or 4 of these
things.
Um, I think the foundation was one
of the earlier ones.
And I was, uh, the person herding
cats and trying to get votes to
happen and working on the bylaws and
some of that stuff.
I think I was on the board
of the I was on the board
of the Foundation for a while as
well.
I've done a lot of stuff, and
I have a terrible memory.
It's a it's a, it's an entrepreneur
self-protection mechanism.
It's like, don't have two good memories
because there's a lot of action that
happens.
Um, um, but yes.
Okay then.
So so I'll go.
So.
So easel goes away.
So what are you what what were
you going to do?
What was your next?
Oh.
Oh, I was out of the job
and broke, uh, and and I had
met a Korean entrepreneur, uh, named Eugene
Kim, who had a company called Linux
One, but not the controversial one.
There was a famous one in the
US, but Korea and Japan, they sometimes
would do their own thing.
And, you know, because they're islands, you
know, or peninsulas, there would be like
distinct cultural things going on and marketplace
dynamics.
Um, and so we didn't offer me
a job in Seoul, and I was
like, oh, great.
And I moved to Seoul, learned Korean,
uh, worked at Linux one thinking about
enterprise adoption of Linux and so on.
Uh, worked for a minute at one
of these open source companies that offered
an alternative to Microsoft Office, I think
it was called Ansoft.
Um, and um, and watched people use
their phones for everything.
And I was like, oh, this thing
can be a music player and a
camera and a dating system.
That's interesting.
And so when I came back and
a year or two later, the iPhone
was announced, I was like, oh my,
I've seen that world.
It's in Seoul.
This is going to be big.
And is that where you joined?
Jumped over to the Firefox phase just
now.
Exactly.
So.
Okay, so how did you get how
did you get to the Mozilla Foundation?
Yeah.
So I was.
In I was in Seoul, I believe,
um, working for Linux one and got
a call from Mitch Kapoor, if I
recall.
Uh, and, um, so this would have
been I might get the timeline a
little bit wrong, but I'm guessing around
2003, maybe 2004.
Um, um, Netscape boy, this is like
one of this is the kind of
question you ask Neil Patel.
Hey, Neil, tell me the history of
Netscape.
You know, they do these roll ups
of what gets bought and spun out
and reworked.
Um, uh, what's that?
What's this podcast called, uh, where they
just, like, follows the org chart, um,
decoder.
Um, this is a decoder episode.
Um, Netscape had rolled up into Time
Warner or the other way around, and
it hadn't worked out and the market
crashed.
And this whole vision of the future
sort of collapsed.
And, um, AOL Time Warner was no
longer interested in that asset and were
about to kill off Netscape.
I think they actually made a distribution
deal with Microsoft for an explorer.
Um, and Mitchell Baker, um, uh, had
been working on Netscape stuff and Mozilla
stuff within that organization.
I'm not quite sure the employment history
how that works, but I'm sure it's
a different chapter in your in your
documentary.
But Mitch Kapor, uh, had been working
with Mitchell on a thing called the
Open Source Application Foundation.
Uh, and, and Mitchell connected with Mitch
and they were talking about, can we
create a gnome fund, a mozilla Foundation?
Uh, and I think the two of
them put their heads together.
And out of that came the Mozilla
Foundation.
I got a call from Mitch Kapor
one day going, hey, we're about to
announce the Mozilla Foundation.
We got $5 million that Netscape is
contributing.
Contributing.
Can you help us write the press
release?
And I was like, yeah, I can
type.
And I sort of like, this is
sort of like parts the errands runner.
You know, I'm good at running errands,
right?
Um, and so I typed up or
helped with the announcement of the Mozilla
Foundation.
And then there was another thing to
do and another thing to do.
And so before long, Mitch Kapoor had
hired me to work for the Open
Source Application Foundation.
And he's like, go help Mitch with
whatever she needs help with.
And and this is how I showed
up in the newly established Mozilla Foundation,
I want to say, about six months
before Firefox launched, maybe eight months.
And you are really involved in that
launch?
Yes.
Um, so the early days of the
Mozilla Foundation, as I remember them, they
were about a dozen people on payroll.
Uh, it was Brendan, you know, shepherding
the engine, uh, Chris Hoffman on the
community and open source contributor there was
Ben Goodger.
There was a community person.
There was Mitchell doing overall governance and
leadership.
And in total there was about a
dozen people working in the foundation, you
know, uh, and, um, and, and I
was asked to help with fundraising.
I was like, can you help us
figure out how to bring in $1
million a year so we can keep
the lights on when this AOL money
dries up?
It was the original sort of charge.
Um, and I noticed that there was
this thing called the Mozilla suite.
Mozilla.
I forget what it was called.
I think it was called the Mozilla
Suite, and that was then repackaged into
the Netscape Communicator suite, if I recall
that product name.
Right.
Um, and that was where the users
were.
But but there was this there were
2 or 3 people that were doing
something else.
Uh, there was an email.
There was a guy working on an
email app called Thunderbird, and there were
2 or 3 people, Ben and Blake
and a few others and Joe Hewitt,
that were working on a new browser.
It was called Firebird.
Then Phoenix or maybe Phoenix.
Phoenix.
Then Firebird.
Then Firefox.
And so there was this thing out
there that was rough around the edges.
And they were.
The Mozilla was a pirate ship.
And then in the pirate ship, there
was a little sub pirate ship, you
know.
So now we're like in a sandbox.
And it was the three of them
building a four of them, building a
browser, sort of without anybody's permission, using
all of the code, you know, from
ten years of Netscape development, but building
a much simpler product that just did
one thing browsing the web without annoying
pop ups, and you could feel energy
around that.
Uh, so I was an early advocate
within the organization saying, hey, Mitchell, let's
this is cool.
We should focus on this.
And so the first thing that I
ended up working on was the rebranding,
because we had to go because they
had just moved from Phoenix, which was
a trademark issue, to Firebird, which has
a different trademark issue.
And I believe Mitchell asked me to
help come up with a name for
the thing.
And I sat down with, um, with
Ben and a few other folks, and
Ben picked Firefox.
And then overnight, a logo was born
in the community, and I so, so
so that was my first project of
sort of like coordinating, coming up with
a new name and a new logo.
So, so where.
Did where did Firefox come from?
What, what?
Well.
Phoenix rises from the ashes.
So that was that one Firebird.
I think it might be Ben.
Like sporty cars, American muscle cars and
sort of that, sort of that land
of branding is I think what it
probably because there was a thing called
Thunderbird, which is the email client.
So I think Scott's the person that
came that that was leading Thunderbird and
Ben, they were they might have had
they might have been hanging out at
the bar talking about cars after hours.
I'm not sure how they came up
with Thunderbird, but in Firebird.
But.
So Firebird had a trademark issue, and
so we did a name storming internally.
And then I'm pretty sure this came
up with Firefox, and I think it's
just a word that came out that
he had heard, but I don't think
he'd seen the picture yet.
You know what I mean?
Like, it's one of these things where
you're sitting at a name storm and
I've, I've started too many things in
my career.
So this is a thing I've done
like a dozen times.
More than a dozen times.
Um, and so Firefox rolled off of
his tongue and, and we figured out
the backstory of the animal, and we're
like, that's cool and cute.
Uh, what kind of imagery goes along
with that?
It feels kind of speedy and fiery
and exciting, and it's sort of a
it's it's different from Firebird, but it's
sort of it's sort of part of
a brand, you know, evolution.
Um, yeah.
Ben Goodyear just, um, just just a
word that that he, he, he had
conviction around.
This has been a thing that I've
always been a fan of, which is
in consumer products, whether it be at
Walt Disney Company or in open source.
I've always loved product that's driven by
engineers and I've always loved product.
That's where there's a strong opinion in
the middle of it, as opposed to
sort of like surveys and market research
and business analysis and product requirements analysis,
like here's a person with conviction and
ideally, that person with conviction then goes
and builds it.
You know, when you come across a
person that's really good at putting their
ideas into action, into code, and they
have really strong conviction and their ideas
hit, you know, for a moment in
time in the culture.
That's the thing that I'm always looking
for.
And I found that like 2 or
3 times in my career and sort
of almost found it like 20 times,
you know, and there's a big difference
between almost finding it and finding it.
But Ben and Blake and Joe and
the other folks working on Firefox.
They had found that thing where there
was a product that had conviction and
a strong sense of curation, which is
saying, no, which is open source, is
very, very historically very bad at that,
just because of consensus, you know, um,
systems.
Um, and so when Ben came up
with the name, I was like, it's
it's his thing, you know, he this
is his thing.
And we're betting on Ben and the
crew.
And so when in doubt, you go
with that person because you're going to
end up with a product that that
has a that you can sense authorship
behind.
And so for me, one of the
reasons I love the name Firefox is
that it was like, that's his choice.
And this is his product.
And you can feel it when you're
using it.
You know, there's a person here that
cared, right?
And you were in charge of marketing
it.
Um.
Yeah.
It was it was a I mean,
the whole thing was a cabal, right?
So there's like a dozen people, everybody's
doing seven different things.
And so What does it mean to
be in charge of marketing?
The thing marketed itself because it was
great software and it hit, you know,
product market fit.
And so that's just the thing.
Ben Goodger did and that Microsoft did,
you know like that just happened.
Right.
And so and then it got a
name and a logo.
And that's because there was a designer
with a great idea and Ben with
conviction on the name.
Um, so the job of marketing and
so to the extent that I was
in charge of marketing, the job was
just to corral and organize the energy
and just sort of move the process
along, which is weird because I'm not
this is not my superpower to sort
of find consensus and move process along.
Um, but that's really what I did.
There was like, hey, there's a lot
of people that love this thing.
It's just just help organize that energy,
right?
And so that meant, oh, is anybody
working on locally?
Hey, Chris, how many people are translating
Firefox?
Oh, can we have little landing pages
and websites Translator two can those folks
all make announcements and try to get
some local press coverage, you know?
Um, oh, there's a guy named Chris
Messina.
He wants to take out an ad
in the New York Times.
Oh, there's somebody had the idea of
a site called Spread Firefox.
Let's do that.
It was sort of, you know, grabbing
that energy and focusing it, not unlike
political campaigns, you know, like there's a
lot of grassroots energy.
And then and then you're trying to
deploy that energy, right?
Or channel it in certain directions that
are more productive than others.
Yeah.
Were there any unique choices in marketing
an open source browser?
I mean, does did it matter to
consumers at all, or did you use
a different kind of technique to do
it?
Yeah, we we I think we this
is going to sound real fancy, but
but it wasn't you know, but but
but but it is true that we
spoke just like today.
You can go to Mozilla.org.
And that's different from Firefox.
Com you know, um, when we talk
to developers and, and the nerds on
Slashdot, right.
Or you know, that that would have
been maybe the place at that time,
right?
Um, you're talking about monopoly and open
source, and if you love Linux, but
you want to try it and you're
a fan of open source, here's something
you can download.
So that was part of how we
communicated with that core community.
I was just reading a story overnight,
uh, that talks about, oh, Casey Newton
in platformer this morning, talks about, uh,
ChatGPT is now a search engine.
And then Casey story goes back to
how, um, Paul Graham when he started
Y-combinator.
So this would have been like ten
years ago, talked about somebody to go
build a search engine.
And the way you start a search
engine to go after Google is you
build one that is used by all
the hackers, meaning the people in Y-combinator.
Right?
The startups in Y Combinator.
And that's very small, but it's very
influential that that core idea we were
obviously doing at Firefox as well is
like, there's these folks here that are
very influential, and we're talking to them
about the values and the politics and
all that stuff, you know?
But but the thing is 2005, I
forget.
I forget what the exact year is
that Firefox 1.0 went out, but but
about that time what was going on.
Is that one of the top stories,
you know, of the year would have
been, uh, spyware, uh, and pop ups
and web nuisances and people trying to
steal your credit card information from the
internet and so on.
Um, and Internet Explorer had gained monopoly
power.
It was like 98% market share, and
they were just not innovating it.
And it was a it was a
bad product.
And people would there would be all
these pop ups and nuisances and it
would be dangerous and confusing, you know?
And so we just had a better
problem product that solved that problem.
And so when we but the way
Firefox took off was that your cousin,
you know, who's into computers.
He's using it because he loves it.
And then, you know, grandma's nervous because
somebody tried to steal her credit card,
or there's too many windows on her
screen.
And then.
And then the cousin says, oh, download
this thing.
It doesn't have that problem.
So you ended up with a really
strong marketing message, which was like, this
browser is better and keeps you safe.
It's very simple marketing.
Um, and it was brought to you,
told you by, you know, the weird
cousin that keeps your computer running.
And that's how we got to was
it 70% market share, ultimately.
Wow.
And you also worked on one second.
I need to I need to I
need to blow my nose here for
a second.
And I think I'm going to set
the dog free.
Is that okay?
You know what?
I'm going to stop recording.
Okay.
All right, I'm back.
Doggies may wander through from time to
time now.
Okay.
You and also barking may occur from
time to time.
So far, I haven't heard a thing.
Okay.
Right, right.
Cuz the cleaners came in and the
AirPods filter out the background noise.
But there's probably going to be at
least a little moment where they start
barking, and then you'll redo the question
as needed.
Okay.
Sounds good.
Okay, I think we're we are recording
again.
Okay.
I was just about to ask you
about, um, you know, you also were
building partnerships with with corporations.
Google, Yahoo!
Um, how did that work with with
open source and what you were trying
to do?
So funny.
As soon as I leave the dogs,
they start barking.
I was like, well, maybe that maybe
the.
I barely I barely hear it.
Oh yeah.
No, These microphones are all good.
Um, but right now, they're.
Right.
Now they're barking.
So I'm just going to.
I'll just trust that you'll tell me
if it's interfering, or we just start
over, and then I'll get the dogs
out of the way.
Or will we do the question?
Um, your question was, how do we
think about partnerships?
Yeah.
Because you partnered with Google and Yahoo
and.
Yeah.
So how did that how did that
work being an open source, you know,
philosophy that you guys had?
Well, when we did easel, I remember
getting a call one day, I picked
up the phone in the office and
it was Michael Dell on the phone,
and he was ready to invest.
And we had just raised money and
decided we didn't need it.
And we sort of politely, you know,
declined.
And and years later, this would have
been fabulous.
That phone call happened again with the
same Michael Dell on the other side.
Um, um, but so by the time
I got to Firefox, I was like,
money's good, you know?
And so, like, right now I'm in
the Mastodon world and I'm like, no,
no, no money's good.
Even if you don't love capitalism, because
it's like you need resources to get
stuff done and only volunteers, it's very
hard to ship, especially consumer product.
It works for SQL and other things.
But but if you're trying to build
Firefox, if you're trying to make Mastodon
user friendly, it takes people doing annoying
stuff for months and months at a
time, and they don't do that for
free.
Or not enough of them do that
for free at the right level of,
you know, of of commitment and so
on.
Um, so by the time we got
to Firefox 0.7, there was a real
groundswell.
And I remember putting out those, those,
those builds, you know, Firefox 0.70.71 and
so on.
And every time, every time we put
out one of these announcements, there would
be more downloads than the last one,
and it would be like, oh shoot,
we got like a million downloads.
And then it's like a million and
a half downloads and then 2 million
downloads.
Oh, we need more servers because the
servers are going to melt.
That was a thing, you know.
Um, and so you could feel the
energy around Firefox building.
By the time we got to 0.700.8
and we knew that there was a
lot of people at Google using it.
I don't know how we knew that.
I'm going to guess that it was
like Ben Goodger nerding out and going
like, or Chris Hoffman or you know,
or you know, or Brendon for that
matter, going, look at our download logs.
We got like 50,000 downloads from google.com
or something.
There's probably something like that is how
we figured it out, you know.
Um, and um, and I remember my
personal goal or my, my job description
was fined us $1 million so you
can keep the lights on.
And I had two good ideas.
The first one was like, oh, let's
put a PayPal button in the browser
and like, like, you know, help support
kind of thing, you know, and and
very quickly we started money started coming
in and you could see that it
would, you could see that that would
be $1 million over a year.
Just the PayPal button, you know, because
there was just people love this thing
and they wanted to be part of
it and the vibes were good and
so on.
And then the second idea was there
was a guy that called, one day
the phone rings and there's a guy
on the phone and goes like, hey,
I would like to talk to you
about our CD and Books and Manuals
program for Netscape, and we want to
bring it over to Firefox.
And I was like, you're doing what?
He's like, I'm selling CDs.
I want to sell CDs and manuals
with fire CDs with Firefox on them,
and manuals for Firefox.
So, you know, there's a thing called
the internet and you can just click
on a link and then you don't
need to pay.
You know, he's like, yeah, but people
like to have the physical thing.
I was like, all right, I don't
have time for this.
He's like, no, no, no, you get
a lot of money.
And I was like, well, how much?
And he's like $1 million.
And so we did a distribution deal
around Firefox and Mozilla, but then Firefox
on on CD and manuals that people
could, and that looked like it was
going to be $1 million a year
to, you know.
So I was like, wow, this, this
is really working.
Um, and, um, and then I remember
waking up one day and reading about
Askjeeves and how, uh, Google was being
achieved, 70% of the ad revenue that
was coming in to Google through Askjeeves,
which was one of these things that
had a logo on it.
And then it was search results and
ads, both delivered by Google, and the
revenue split was 70%.
So I remember calling Mitch Kapoor and
going, hey, Mitch, do you know anybody
at Google?
He's like, yeah, I know Sergey and
Larry.
I was like, why don't you call
them?
Because we should have a meeting with
them, because we got this search box
up there and they're paying people good
money for that.
Uh, he's like, whatever.
Sure, I'll set that up.
Um, and so, um, and so Mitchell
and myself and Mitch.
We basically worked together with Larry and
Sergey, and I think it was those
were the two principals in the room
at the time at Google and got
the first search monetization deal done.
And so that was the first of
its kind, that thing that has been
in the news about the antitrust stuff
around search distribution.
Um, I'm pretty sure that that was
our deal.
That was the first of its kind
is where Firefox, we went to Sergey
and Larry and negotiated a revenue split
on the search box in the upper
right corner of Firefox.
Wow.
And so so you were there until
2005?
Yeah.
It looks like like literally like a
month after Firefox one left.
Um, I'm an entrepreneur.
I'm impatient.
I don't love process.
I'm really great at starting things, but
I'm not always great at seeing them
through.
And, um, you know, as you get
older, you sort of learn that there's
different attributes to leadership and different kinds
of leadership.
And being a CEO is not the
same as being a founder.
It's not the same as being an
entrepreneur.
So you figure out there's all this
nuance.
And so, um, my superpower is I
get excited sometimes I get excited about
things that are good, you know, um,
and I have energy and can get
people excited about them.
Uh, I am not good at being
a manager in the sense of bringing
order and stability and predictability, and I'm
really good at finding waves and jumping
on them.
And that doesn't mean that I'm really
good at sort of stabilizing things and
managing them.
So after Firefox went out, it was
like, this thing is a big hit.
We need to do another 74 things
in the next 24 hours, you know,
to get another billion downloads.
Um, and I think mostly wisely, Mitchell
was like, okay, that's too crazy.
We need to now we're in a
different phase and we need to now
manage this growth.
And then a few months later, John
Lilly came in who's just amazing.
Uh, I think he became the CEO,
but I left within a few months
and was like, I got lots of
ideas of what we can do with
the browser.
And we built one called FLoC.
Um, and, and we had a great
start.
And then I did not do a
good job, you know, sort of shipping
it all the way through 1.0.
I think I underestimated the journey from
really cool demo to 1.0.
Hopefully I've gotten better at that.
But but.
So after Firefox, I got impatient and
started a browser company called FLoC, a
browser based on Firefox.
Um, and that moves faster.
Lots of great ideas.
Uh, but but we shipped a product
that wasn't ready.
Now, now, was that were you considered
then a competitor?
We were an.
Open source browser on top of the
Firefox code base.
And so some people in the Mozilla
community were annoyed by that.
Like, why are you competing with the
with the mothership?
And it's a good cause and all
that.
And then some people in the Mozilla
Muslim community are like, that's great.
We want there to be multiple browsers,
right?
And so so we built it.
We we used the open source license
and built a browser largely based mostly
based on, on the Firefox engine and,
and the Chrome as well.
Yeah.
It was considered a social web browser.
What did that mean?
What?
Yeah, yeah.
Um, there was we had a lot
of good ideas, and then we didn't
do a good enough job curating them.
But a lot of these ideas still
seem really good today.
Even I've been working on on Mastodon
and Activitypub more recently and reconnected with
Chris Messina.
And then sometimes I'm on the phone
with Chris and he'll be like, hey,
Bart, we had the same idea in
2007.
And remember, these are all the same
ideas, and I think it's the ideas
that you will see in Activitypub in
Mastodon as well of, um, the idea
behind web 2.0 and the API.
And you can there's these web services
and you have access, you can build
new experience, new user experience, and you
connect them all.
And there's the idea of the social
graph and what are my friends up
to?
And so we built a web browser
that instead of having a bookmarking tab,
there was a star button.
And so the idea was don't do
bookmarking.
That's just click on that star button
when you see something you like.
Um, and when you do that we'll
save it up to delicious.
Joshua Schachter's um, social bookmarking service.
So by default, your bookmarks will end
up on on delicious.
Uh, and as you're browsing, we have
a search engine called Lucene into the
browser.
And so we're doing full text indexing
of everything you browse.
That's a very good kind of idea.
Right.
And so as you're searching, it'll then
you start typing into the nav bar
and it'll autocomplete suggestions.
And at the top it's going to
show you stuff that you've looked at
before.
And then below it it's going to
give you a preview of the top
search hits on Google and so on
and so on.
Um, so we had a number of
really cool and fresh ideas, mostly around
the social web and things like Flickr
and Delicious, but also around things like
helping people with search and understanding what
you've looked at before and after I
left flock.
Then they really weren't doubled down on
sort of so many, so many features.
Um, I would say for my era.
So the first 18 months of flock,
we had a lot of good ideas
and we should have shipped three of
them instead of ten of them, you
know, and just really seeing those three
through, um, uh, that's what I learned
from that.
So when you it was open source?
Yes.
It was fully open source.
Yeah.
Um, when you when you left flock,
though, were you still involved in it
or once you once you leave, you
leave.
I got fired.
You were the founder.
I have I have this great story
that I that that I've been fired
three times in my life.
Um, which, I mean, it's directionally correct.
It's probably technically we can because it's
like I've been fired three times.
I got fired by a VC Once
that was flock, I got fired by
a therapist once.
He's like, you don't need me anymore.
You're good.
You don't need to come back next
week.
And I got fired by my soccer
coach once.
He was like, nah, you're all set.
You don't need to come back.
So, you know, those are the three
things I've been fired at.
But.
But I got fired from flock.
Um, I think for good reason.
Um, which is that we shipped a
product that wasn't ready, and we missed
our launch window.
And the moment where we had the
attention, we didn't have a product that
delivered on that, and that was my
fault.
Uh, and a guy, um, named David
Cowan at Bessemer Venture Partners fired me.
And then years later, I ran into
him.
He's like, my friend was like, this
is the guy that fired me.
And he's like, you're welcome.
And it's true.
You know, like we are, um, I
think entrepreneurs, there's probably an exception or
two, but many of us are wildly
flawed, along with some powers that we
have.
And so the journey of an entrepreneur
is sort of like, for me at
least, becoming clear eyed about what you're
good at and what you're flawed at.
And that was an important lesson for
me.
All right.
And so, so so you were fired
from flock and then is that where
Tapulous comes in?
It was an EIR at a venture
capital firm, and the iPhone came out.
And I remember Steve Jobs being on
stage in January of 2007.
That would have been and saying, we
have three products today a phone, a
web browser and an iPod.
Dun dun dun.
And I was like, oh, that makes
sense.
Um, and I was so excited when,
when when they announced the iPhone.
So they announced it, I believe Steve
announced it in January of 2007 and
then it shipped in, I believe, July
the 1st, June the 30th, actually.
So June the 30th, 2007.
Um, and as soon as he announced
it, I was like, that's going to
be big.
I want to be there.
Um, and so I was noodling around
and interested in that.
And the iPhone came out and within
like a week, people had jailbroken, hacked
open that phone because it only worked
on AT&T in the United States.
And there are a lot of people,
a lot of AT&T, and there's a
whole lot of people not in the
United States.
So within like a month, there was
like, you can go to a website,
jailbreak me or something, you know, dot
com, and then you click on a
button and voila, your phone now works
in China, you know, or you know,
or on Verizon I believe as well.
Uh, and people started then making jailbreak
apps, you know.
But this is a year the App
Store launched a year later in 2008,
uh, in mid-July 2008.
Um, so as soon as the iPhone
came out, I was like, this is
awesome.
I want to be there and there's
going to be apps here.
And I was talking to investors that
I wanted to build a company here,
and they were like, what about web
apps?
I was like, no, no, this is
going to be real apps here.
This is much better.
Uh, and there was a hacker community.
There were people building hacks.
And I hired a few folks to
do some prototyping, and I bought a
few apps in the jailbreak days before
there was an app store.
Uh, and when when, when?
And so before the App Store launched,
I raised a little bit of money.
Uh, I think it was, like, $1.8
million, I want to say.
Um, and so that came after being
an EIR and been thinking about the
world and DCS and seeing Steve Jobs
on stage and remembering remembering how I
used my phone in Korea.
And I was like, this thing is
going to be big.
And out of that came came Tapulous
in 2008.
Okay.
Talk about the product that you developed
for that.
Um, well, the big idea was, um,
this is going to be big, and
social networking was already a big thing
at the time.
It was like, there's going to be
a social network here.
But instead of it being Facebook Dot,
now they call that Facebook the blue
app, you know.
So there being one app that does
a 1000 things, it's going to be
ten different apps.
There's going to be a photo app
and a people app and a and
a chat app and so on.
And then they're all going to be
on the same back end so that
they all your friends, their friends in
one app, their friends.
And I was like, I'm going to
go build all these apps.
And so that was a big thesis
that ended up being correct.
Um, as we were trying to build
that, I was hanging out, you know,
with, with the kids at the super
Happy dev House, you know, like the
hackathons and stuff, you know, and I
know.
And then one of the guys I
was going to work with was a
guy that worked on flask.
He was his handle, and he was
playing this game.
And I was like, what are you
doing?
He's like, I'm playing this game.
It's called Tap Tap Revolution.
It was a jailbreak app and I
was like, oh, that's really cool.
What's that?
He's like, oh yeah, you can download
it on jailbreak app or whatever.
Um, and install that app.
And I found this developer, Nate True,
that had built this sort of killer
app for the jailbreak days.
It was called Tap Tap Revolution.
and I kept trying to hire him,
and he didn't want a job.
Like I was happy sort of feeding
his parakeets and just doing science experiments,
you know?
In Seattle, I love nature.
Um, and, um, um, and and a
few months later, my co-founder walked into
the office and goes like, hey, you
guys still don't want to work for
us, but he'll sell you his apps
since you keep calling him.
And so we bought Tap Tap Revenge
on a lark.
Uh, and when the App Store launched,
uh, we had a couple social apps.
We had the first Twitter client.
It was called twinkle.
We had 1 or 2 other apps.
Um, but the thing that went to
number one on the first day of
the App Store was tap Tap Revenge.
Uh, there were 553 apps on the
first day of the App Store, and
there was bejeweled and five other apps,
five other games that cost like $10
each, you know, and we had this
simple little game that was high quality.
There was like really bad tic tac
toe kind of apps, you know?
So we had the only game one
out of 553 apps, and it was
the only game that was free and
good, compelling.
And it reminded people of Guitar Hero,
which was just just towards the end
of the Guitar Hero era of, you
know, that was a big thing at
the time.
Um, so the timing was right, and
a million people had already downloaded it
in jailbreak land before the App Store.
Uh, and so we became the first
big hit on the App Store.
I'll never forget being on a plane
that first holiday.
So I think this would have been
like the after launched in like September.
Or maybe it was the after launch
in July, but I remember being on
a plane to go to a family
vacation.
And on the plane there were four
people playing Tap Tap Revenge.
And I was like, oh wow, this
is like a this is like a
pop culture phenomenon, you know?
Um, so, so we built something that
that really worked.
And did you do.
Did you make any changes to it
when you bought it or.
Oh, yeah, when we bought it, I
believe that that revolution was one file.
It was not.
It was not like a beauty of
engineering, you know.
It was like something that Nate had
hacked together in an afternoon, which is.
Which is the kind of developer that
Andy Hertzfeld had a similar reputation of,
like.
No, no, no.
These are incredible developers that are creative
geniuses.
Right.
Or just about.
Um, and they're not engineers.
They're people that hack up cool, exciting
ideas.
Now, to turn that into products, you're
going to want to surround them with
other folks.
And so Nate was that kind of
guy.
Uh, and so we had to build
a real app, and we had to
give it a name that wasn't infringing.
Um, and, and then we had to
figure out how to get music into
it.
Uh, because startup revolution would connect with
all the songs on your phone.
And that was not allowed under the
App Store SDK.
So we had to go license music
and build a whole content pipeline.
And we had, you know, we had
to build the app, but it looked
and felt a lot like the original
startup revolution.
Uh, and we should mention to this,
this was not open source, right?
Not open source.
Is this the only thing you've done
that wasn't open source?
Uh, it may be.
It may be.
I'm going to say yes, but then
I'm probably going to forget something.
Uh, no.
In the I did, I had a
little startup called The Hobby, and then
in there I did some non-open source
apps.
Um, there's these two things in my
career, sort of across the years for
me that I'm sort of, you know,
like sort of getting more clear on.
And then one of them is sort
of like building a better world, you
know, and being a do gooder.
And then the other one is open
source.
Um, I when I started doing Plugged
In, I thought it was all about
social impact and building a better world.
And I do like to work on
things that are worthy of our time,
our short time we have on this
planet.
But I'd like to build things.
And so I'm I get excited about
a little game.
I don't think I'm the right guy
to do B2B, you know, enterprise software
building, gambling.
You know, like I was listening to
something about Polymarket.
That's not my kind of thing.
I don't really want to spend my
time on that because it's just kind
of doesn't feel right to me.
So so so so, so I don't
want to do that.
Um, but in general, like when I
was at the Walt Disney Company, I
was very excited about that.
The idea of social networking, before Facebook
became sort of the red flag that
it became, uh, was exciting to me
just as a, as a like, oh,
wow, you can have a billion people
talk to each other.
That's going to make the world more
connected.
That's cool.
You know, like and not think much
deeper than that, honestly, at the time.
Um, so and then open source, um,
I've always liked open source and still
do.
And I also am not so religious
about it.
And so as we think about open
source, I'm like, well, what's the right
license and why am I using the
GPL?
And then maybe we're using the GPL
for commercial reasons, not just political reasons,
you know, because there's like when you
have a license that's as restrictive as
the GPL it gives you, it gives
you corollary powers, you know, as a
person that owns the copyright.
And so every now and then, you
know, it's not that the good, good
guys pick the GPL and the people
that are slightly less good, pick the
Apache license.
There's commercial considerations that you may want
to go over there.
You know, and frankly, that's what I
did for, for for the Mastodon, for
Mastodon projects.
Um, so I'm not religious about it.
I do like the idea of the
Commons and people working together and crowdsource
those, you know, and so, so I
love the pirate ship, but I also
this is the biggest thing I got
from my time at Mozilla.
The reason Firefox took off was that
there was a big idea like a
Richard Stallman Andy Hertzfeld software should be
free, kind of a big idea and
sort of religion and political convention around
Webster, you know, conviction around web standards
and the open internet.
And everybody should be able to build.
And we don't have gatekeepers.
There was a whole ideology there that
I'm like, yes, yes, yes, I believe
in all of that, you know.
But also there was like a commitment
to winning and a definition of winning
that was a billion people.
And and that's how I'm wired.
Um, I want to build stuff that
has good values, you know, and comports
with a charter, you know, and ideals.
But I want to hit the mainstream
because a product and in the Mastodon
world in particular, many people don't feel
like that, but I do.
Um, if you really want to make
a dent in the universe, you got
to touch as many people as possible.
And when you're just touching a thousand
people, that's a club.
But that's not really changing the landscape.
And so with Firefox, there was there
was Mitchell and Brendan and Ben.
They all wanted to win.
We wanted to I wanted to have
$1 million in the bank and then
$2 million.
And that's a competitive thing, right?
But you need that to keep the
lights on and to pay people, you
know, so that they can do good
work.
And I think Mitchell wanted to get
to 100 million users.
And Brendan would sit there and look
at I remember that there would be
these, you know, check in reviews, PR
reviews every day.
And they'd be like, all right, this
is the web standards.
You know, these are the standards and
the definitions and the values.
But CNN.com is not loading.
Right.
In Firefox we got to go fix
that.
Or you know somebody there that you
can call to go fix their website.
Please go call them.
But if you don't I'm going to
make it.
So I'm going to go hack it
so that there's a allowlist a whitelist.
We call them at the time in
Firefox.
And we're going to we're going to
support some non-standard behaviors so that CNN
works on Firefox.
Because if CNN doesn't work on Firefox,
why would your grandma then your grandma
can't use it.
So there was a pragmatism combined with
conviction and core values and a willingness
to negotiate.
And that's very hard because you're getting
your hands dirty, right?
Because you're like, oh, I'm supporting the
devil.
I'm Acrobat works in my browser, whatever
the devil looks like at that particular
point in time.
Right.
I'm doing it because I want to
get to a billion users.
But but I'm being thoughtful about it
and deliberate about that.
And, you know, and I have a
plan for, you know, saying waving goodbye
to the devil.
Right.
Or no longer supporting Acrobat five years
later and so on and so on.
And I think that was the superpower
of of early Mozilla Foundation.
And the Firefox story is that we
were able to combine values and principles
around open source and open internet and,
and power to the people.
Combine that with technology and pragmatism featured
in the web browser, where Google would
just say, no, he was just he
would just throw out features all day
long.
He's like, no, no, it makes something
because he understood that every feature you
add makes the product more complicated.
Boy, open source people really don't understand
the cost, you know, of a of
a shortcut or something in the settings.
Everything has a cost.
Um, we are very good at that.
In in the Firefox 100 days.
Um, and so as I think about
sort of my personal values and open
source and why wasn't that so?
I don't know.
I didn't see a particular reason why
that was going to be good for
the world or good for our business.
And so it wasn't.
Yeah.
You did.
You mentioned, you know, being in the
mainstream.
And so tapulous and you really were
acquired by Disney, which is you can't
get much more mainstream than that.
Talk about that.
How did that come about?
How did you feel about it?
Yeah, I loved working at Disney for
the most part, and the reason that
I personally loved it is that, uh,
you know, I don't think most people
wouldn't bet that Bart will do well
in fortune 100 sort of company setting,
you know?
Um, but but the Walt Disney Company,
they work with creative talent.
And so I walked into a company
where there was, um, there was Pixar,
and there were lots of other organizations
and divisions that were really driven by
creators and creative visionaries and that really
that really led with the quality of
the vision and the product and the
story that was being told.
um.
My boss was a guy named John
Pleasants, um, who ended up, went on
to be the co-founder of peloton, uh,
and really gave me a lot of
I remember going to like, I'm not
happy here.
It's like, why not?
Like, because I'm spending all my day
in meetings, like, well, then don't go
to meetings, just try to ship a
good game.
I was like, oh, I can do
that here.
And then Bob Iger would do the
same thing.
Who's still he's once again the CEO
at Disney now.
Um, but so the Walt Disney Company
they kind of treated me as talent
and at Disney at the time.
And I'm pretty sure still today talent.
If you had to pick between the
MBA with the management chops and the
talent, with the creative vision that can
tell a story and bring it into
the world, that person would get at
least as much, you know, listening time
and power.
So it was a place that valued,
um, uh, creators.
And I was sort of put into
that bucket, uh, and was able to
focus on building great games.
Where's my water is what came out
of that, a billion users.
Um, and I love the Walt Disney
Company because you would go to the
park, and it is such a beautiful
part of the American story and American
culture, and sort of where Americans of
all stripes go.
It's kind of like the Obama speech.
You know, there's so much more that
brings us together in common than what
separates us.
But that's what it's like to go
to Disneyland, like all of America comes
together, and I'm European, so I don't
love all of sort of, you know,
Americana.
Right?
But but you would run into folks
in the park and you'd be like,
you know, people that work there and
are selling, you know, popcorn.
And they're like, I've been working here
for 20 years.
And, you know, I love our guests.
And and they would talk about what
the company means to them and how
big a fan they are.
And then you would run into folks
that are visiting the park and, and
you would realize this is part of
the American story and a beautiful part
for the most part.
And then Bob Iger is a very
good CEO.
And he would talk about the business
language he would use would be around
brand deposits and brand withdrawals.
Right.
It's like, hey, we're the Walt Disney
Company.
And when we're selling a whole bunch
of t shirts at Walmart, that might
be a brand branch withdrawal where we're
doing.
He wouldn't say it like that, but
like, you're kind of cheapening the brand
a little bit to make another buck
and to hit your quarterly objectives, you
know.
And you would do some of that
every now and then.
Right.
Um, but he's like, but are we
doing enough?
Are we making enough brand deposits?
Are we investing in new stories, not
just doing another franchise, you know, update?
Um, are we leading with a creative
vision?
Enough.
You know, are we leading with values
and really trying to build magical experiences
enough.
And so that's me, right?
Like, it's like the values and the
pragmatism.
Um, and so I thought this was
really special.
And I got to help introduce Disney
to a new generation by putting Mickey
Mouse and Where's My Water game?
And it was a really good game.
Um, and and it was great.
Yeah.
Did they really?
Did you have to focus on their
intellectual property or could you could, you
know, I could do.
Whatever I want.
Um, what happened was the law, at
least, was that Steve Jobs was on
the board of Disney and was not
not excited about the first wave of
Disney apps.
I was like, you got to go.
You got to go find some Silicon
Valley talent that knows how to build
apps and that we required as part
of that.
So I ended up running a smartphone
games for The Walt Disney Company for
four years, three and a half years.
Um, and I remember going around the
company and I was like, I'm looking
for the next banker because I remembered
shipping Firefox, you know, and what that
felt like to have product market fit,
led by a visionary, uh, person that
could express ideas and curate experiences.
And we found them and it was,
uh, Tim Fitzrandolph who was sitting somewhere
in a studio in Glendale.
And because he spoke Japanese, I think
he was in charge of Japanese localization
for, um, console gaming for for the
Disney gaming business at the time.
And he had built a game, a
physics game on the App Store called
the name is escaping right now.
But he'd had a number one game
on the App Store.
Um, that was just in his personal
name was a free game.
It didn't make any money off of
it.
And I was like, well, who's that
guy?
What are you.
Hey, Tim, come over here.
What do you want to work?
He's like, oh, I have this physics
thing, you know, and it looks like
this.
And I was like, oh, cool.
Who's doing that?
He's like, um, it's an alligator that
needs to get water because he's thirsty
and needs to take a shower.
And like, okay.
And I remember like a week before
we shipped it, talking to my to
John, my boss, who was at an
offsite with Bob Iger and them.
He's like I met I met I
met the Disney um uh, the park
the Animal Adventures Park, Animal Kingdom in
Florida with the board of directors here
and with Bob.
And I'm looking down on the pond
and there's alligators below me, and they
look like they want to eat me.
Why is your lead character an alligator?
Why can't you just be like, oh,
we need you for something, right?
And I was like, no, it's an
alligator.
It's been decided.
Don't worry about it.
And we just stuck to our guns
and the company led us.
Um, but it was that same idea
of like, no, Ben gets to pick
the name Firefox at the end of
the day because it's his thing, you
know?
And so Tim Fitzrandolph Where's My Water
was his idea.
And part of that idea is a
mechanic, you know, drilling, you know, cutting
through water.
And then part of it is the
story around that.
And so you get to you get
to name that character.
And so that was that's as a
manager, it's sort of the same as
in the Graham Foundation kind of world.
It's like all I'm doing is I'm
just protecting the creator, you know, in
that in that early stage, as you're
going from 0 to 1, as Peter
Thiel would say, um, and protecting them
and supporting them.
Uh, and that's sort of all I
do, but that's important, you know.
How long were you there at Disney?
Uh, three and a half years.
And why did you leave?
Uh, it was time to reorg and
manage.
Uh, and I felt like, well, now
I'm spilling all my days in budget
meetings.
Uh, and the reason was that when
I was acquired, when our little startup
was acquired, it was the first generation
of the App Store, which was about
free downloads and 99 cent games.
And what happens as I was at
Disney is social gaming happened and social
gaming was, um, what you would call
the free to play games.
And they were free downloads and in-app
upsells, and they are gaming systems that
I've just never loved.
Uh, and it's around, um, driving engagement
and, and building game systems that put
roadblocks at strategic points.
Just when you're, like, getting ready to,
like, get to the next level.
Now there's a financial roadblock where you
need to pay $8 or whatever it
is.
And I was like, oh, and then
you'd hire folks that have worked in
Vegas in the casino context, and then
they would go work at Facebook, and
they're working on push notifications, and then
they're working on social games.
It's all the same stuff.
Their engagement systems, you know, whether it's
Vegas or social networking apps or free
to play games.
Um, that just wasn't where my heart
was.
And when you have a thing, that's
one thing.
It's very hard to transplant that into
another thing.
So like, where's my water game with
a billion people?
That was amazing.
But that would be maybe $40 million
a year in revenue.
But Clash of Clans would be like,
I don't know, $2 billion a year
of revenue within like year one, right?
So then you're like, well, how can
I make this game with a billion
users and make it behave like that
game over there, you know?
So then where's my water will be
bringing in $4 billion a year or
whatever.
Right.
Um, it's very hard to do because
you've set the DNA of the thing
and the team, and we tried and
we failed, and it just wasn't my
thing that I so much of gaming,
especially casual gaming and gaming on social
apps and so on and so on,
it's all free to play.
And I really enjoyed, you know, cut
the rope and Where's my water and
tap tap revenge.
He's sort of like, I don't know,
moments of delights that aren't trying to
monetize every second of your attention, you
know?
Yeah.
And then is that when you founded
the hobby?
Yeah.
I went fishing, and then I had
a couple of app ideas, and I
called our investor and I was like,
hey, I think I want to do
a thing, and I could use a
couple of million dollars, and people seem
to want to invest in it.
But but how do I let them
know that?
It's like, these are like ideas that
I'm messing around with, you know, like
I'm not fully committed in the way
that I was when I was like,
oh, call it the hobby.
That way people will not be mistaken.
This is your hobby.
It's a side project that they're investing
in.
I forgot about reverse psychology, which is
when you call the thing the hobby,
then that's a really good way to
start FOMO.
And people really want to be part
of that.
So we so I started a company
called The Hobby and we built 3
or 4 different apps.
They all failed.
Um.
Building businesses around apps by that time
was much, much, much, much harder than
in the early days.
So, you know, it's sort of my
pattern recognition being off.
It's probably part of it.
Um, I don't think I was committed
enough to them.
I mean, I was more excited about
building the thing than getting users for
the thing and finding product market fit.
Like we should tap Tap revenge.
You know, when Ben and us shipped
Firefox, there's a thing we wanted to
build, and we brought it out and
it found product market fit.
And then we just organized that energy
and we just harvested that energy and
focused it a little bit, you know.
And same with Tap Tap Revenge.
You know, when you have real product
market fit, it's like there's the thing
and you're just harvesting the energy and
just keeping the sanity a little bit.
You know, um, in the real world,
product market fit is something that probably
going to take you in most, most
cases, it's going to take you years
and years of like just just hard
times to discover, you know, like one
phone call at a time, kind of
a thing.
Um, that's hard.
Like, like Jessica who are engineering had
from tap.
She was like, Dude, it's hard to
be doing a startup after Tapulous because,
like, we would literally get 10 million
downloads, you know, like, you know, like
on a big day and then you're
like, I got a startup, I got
my first 14 downloads.
You know, it's very hard to get
excited about.
So I think part of the reason
the hobby failed is that I just
wanted to build that great product that
takes care of itself.
You know, once you set it out,
that just is a thing that happens
once every ten years, you know?
And so no matter how there's like
two inches two entrepreneurs that are the
exception.
But for most of us, even if
your timing is right and so on
and so on, it takes hard labor
to find product market fit, and you
need to do a lot of listening
and changing course and all that kind
of stuff.
I don't think I was committed enough
to do that in the hobby, based
on my pattern recognition from Firefox, and
I got spoiled.
Yeah, but you did.
You did.
One of the one of the things
was a music livestream platform.
Yeah.
And that was good.
That was a good.
That was a.
Good hustle.
Group.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Live streaming never quite got as big,
although that it you know, I mean
Twitch was there and then Twitch has
continued to be there and do well.
And you know, AOC and Tim Walz
and all that kind of stuff.
That's a thing, right?
Um, but live streaming for musicians.
I've always liked music.
You can tell by my background.
Um.
It's hard to make money in music.
That's the thing.
I got lucky with that, that I
found a way to make money in
music once.
They probably made me think I could
do it a second time.
And that may not be true.
Um.
Uh, there's, like, an irrational optimism involved
in being an entrepreneur, you know?
Um, but but it's hard.
I think this I think it might
have been John Lilly or Josh Elman.
I think it was Josh Elman, a
famous, uh, well known venture capitalist and
entrepreneur.
Um, and I remember him telling me
he's like, look, if Keith Richards knocked
on your door and crashed on your
living room, you'd be so excited.
You know, if he'd pulled out his
guitar and started playing guitar.
If he does it again the second
day, he'll be a little bit less
excited.
If he's still there 60 days later
playing the guitar, you don't want this
guy out of your house because he's
like, too annoying and you want to
sleep.
Um, this is the problem with with
live streaming is that it's all about
scarcity of the moment, and then you
somehow need to replicate that.
So you find a great musician and
they do a concert, and they had
a beautiful experience and 50 people showed
up.
So now, like every entrepreneurial instinct you
have and their instincts as a musician
is, I'm going to do that again
tomorrow.
So if 40 people showed up on
the first day, sometimes 80 show up
the next day, but more often 39
show up the next day, you know?
And by the time it's the 10th
day, nobody shows up anymore because you're
oversupplying, you know, it's no longer scarce.
Experience.
And this, this is the single hardest
thing about, you know, live as a
business.
And then people solve it sometimes.
But it's a hard problem.
And that was the a problem that
we ran into with that was called,
uh, what was that one called?
I was going to call it wave,
but that was a different app.
Uh, amplify.
So that one was called.
Yeah.
And amplify.
Period.
Fi.
Yeah.
We've done a we've done a good
job at naming.
My favorite one is the one I
have right now, which is called Sub
Club.
Sub dot club.
That's a good name.
Yeah.
So, so did the hobby fold or
did you just.
Yeah.
It failed.
Okay.
Um, is that then when you went
to and created Mozilla Builders?
Yes.
Uh, the hobby failed.
Trump was president Netscape and I'm sorry.
Sorry, Facebook and Twitter were sort of
all in the mix of the 2016
election.
I was like, what have we done?
You know, which is which is a
great question.
Uh, so when I'm laughing because, I
mean, it's not a great question.
Um, and I was really taken aback
by how technology was sort of in
the mix in that election.
And, you know, if this one comes
out wrong and, you know, I think
we're looking at it all over again.
Um, um, uh, and so I wanted
to use technology for good.
And, uh, I spent a few months
at DuckDuckGo.
Uh, I talked to a lot of
folks and reconnected with Mitchell Baker and,
uh, who was running Mozilla, and she
was like, hey, you know, I'm looking
we're looking for we're open to new
ideas.
You're a creative person.
Come back.
You know, and so I spent a
year and a half or so at
Mozilla.
My second tour of duty as I,
as I like to say, uh, working
with, um, uh, Mark Mayo, who had,
uh, run the Firefox organization and a
fantastic entrepreneur and, and mentor and human
being, and Bijan Marashi and Mitchell put
the three of us in a room
and go, y'all go figure out some
cool stuff.
And out of that came Mozilla builders.
And the idea was, um, I mean,
the simple question Mitchell asked was like,
what's your next big idea?
And I was like, well, I don't
have any good ideas.
And Firefox was never my idea.
But sometimes, like, like to find people
with good ideas.
So why don't we go do that?
So let's go look for folks with
fresh ideas.
Uh, and we built a little incubator.
We called it Mozilla Builders.
We shipped it during Covid.
I think we shipped it in two
and a half weeks.
Um, a woman named Kathy Pham got
involved, and we built a whole little
team, uh, and we, we said we're
looking for folks that, you know, want
to use technology to build a better
world.
And it was very open ended that
way.
Um, and one of the things that
happened that I was really struck by
is I remember applying to Y Combinator,
I think, for the hobby or for
one of my projects, you know, like
a year or two later and hanging
out at the Y Combinator offices.
It's a cool group of people, the
folks that apply, the young entrepreneurs that
are there, they're nerds, dude.
They just they're like cables hanging out
of their pockets.
And they want to they want to
build cool shit, and they also want
to make money.
People are people, right?
Um, but they're good people that believe
in the power of technology, and they
think this technology can do cool shit
in the exact same way that Steve
Jobs thought about it, and Andy Hertzfeld
and everybody else, you know, Linus Torvalds.
And I was like, there's a lot
of there's some shitty people out there.
There's a lot of awesome people that
believe their technology can help build a
better world and solve problems we're solving,
you know, um, and so let's go
find them, you know, and really look
for folks who can explain how this
is going to help build a better
world.
And, and that that impact is sort
of really at the center of what
they're trying to do.
And we found a lot of great
people.
And then a lot of them looked
like they might as well have been
at a Y Combinator fundraising, you know,
pitch as at Mozilla.
And then some of them were activists
that came from the nonprofit and community
organizing background.
And that's great too.
But that's what we built at Mozilla
Builders.
It was great work, and they just
relaunched it around AI themes a few
months ago, so that's great.
What were some of the promising projects
that came out of that?
Well, one of my favorite was was,
was, was was was was not a
technology one.
It was a group of Yale students
that were, um, that were making free
phone calls available to people that were
locked up.
And so their insight was, there's a
whole predatory industry around phone calls into
jails and prisons where they are fundraising.
They're funding vehicles for the, for for,
for the for for the industrial company,
you know, the prison industrial complex.
And then there's businesses on top of
that that make just sort of, um,
that, that, that, that are, that are,
that are leeching on, on vulnerable and
low income populations.
You know, folks who have relatives that
are locked up in jails and prisons.
And so they were they were Emilio
was called, it is called.
And Emilio was a team of students
that were just making free phone calls
available.
And it was fantastic.
And, and, and they've done a lot
of good work.
So that's one extreme.
There were some really cool crypto projects.
Uh, there was a crowdsourcing project by
a group of Waterloo students out of
Canada.
Uh, that was I think it was
folks in Vancouver that were attached to
the Chinese, uh, immigrant communities there.
And then there was like, crowd shopping
traditions out of China, out of mainland
China.
I think it was where aunties would
go to the markets on the morning,
and then they would sell, you know,
to their neighbors, you know, so it's
kind of like it's kind of like
crowd source distribution, you know.
And so we had college students from
from Waterloo that were going to the
farmers market at 4 a.m.
and then using WhatsApp to make organic
and farmer farmer market foods available to
their local community.
So there was a bunch of different
approaches to solve, to using technology to
solve real world problems, and then and
then sometimes stay in the digital realm.
But there was a bunch of stuff
in decentralized, slack, alternative, all kinds of
stuff.
Yeah.
One of the things that when it
was started, you, you said, you know,
it was going to define also fixing
the internet.
Yeah.
Which was great because it was like,
let's, let's fix the internet.
And then you're, you're sort of the
image is like the Comcast guy showing
up at your house.
I have a t shirt that says,
let's fix the internet.
Um, yeah, I yeah.
Yes, yes, yes.
Um, but but it's like this is
one of the this is sort of
that same thing that open source tends
to be bad at because we lead
with values and strongly held beliefs.
We can be a little literal.
And so when you get into the
world of consumer marketing, or if you
listen to Kamala Harris on TV, right.
Like, you've got to figure out a
way to say your stuff simply.
And sometimes that means that you're 90.
That it's 99% literally correct, and that
it's that there's like there's like a
literal part of it that you might
be getting wrong.
And so there's a poetry of marketing
and talking to consumers, you know, let's
fix the internet is a good one.
Um, then you went on to, to
co-found Block Block?
Yes.
Uh, I was I had a friend,
uh, so just as I was getting
restless for the second time at Mozilla,
uh, and Mitchell was like, are you
sure this is the right place for
you, Bart?
And good question, Mitchell.
Let's talk about it.
Um, just as I was getting restless.
Um, um, I had a friend on
Twitter, uh, who was an artist.
Like a like a like a punk
artist.
And he was talking about this thing
called NFTs and artists led collectives.
And I was like, this is a
whole new world.
This is really interesting.
And so Mark and I left and
we're like we're interested in decentralization.
There's this thing called the blockchain.
And then Mozilla invested in it.
And some of the other folks that
invested in the hobby and stuff invested.
And we raised a couple of million
dollars, and we called the company block
block.
And we were interested in decentralization and
the blockchain.
And then as we it was like
literally the month that NFT craze happened,
you know?
And so I helped organize a thing
called the Meebits Dao, which was around
portable digital assets.
I was like, oh, this is like
the foundation of like, like your your
digital stuff should belong to you, and
you should be able to log in
with your digital avatar wherever you want.
I mean, a lot of these are
sort of the kinds of concepts that,
you know, OAuth and the web standards
and Web2 we've been excited about, you
know, so I was like, that's sort
of how I entered the space.
And we built an artist collective called
matter that I still love.
That guy is still working on.
We built a digital contracts platform on
the blockchain.
And then I kept being confused about
what is crypto.
Because it's just the technology was always
just really complicated.
Um, and then ultimately I concluded that
there's great technology and great people.
I'm actually a fan of Vitalik Buterin,
the Ethereum founder, and several other folks,
but but by and large, it's part
of the gambling economy.
And when I'm watching the NBA, I
love watching basketball, but it's basically a
way to run ads for betting platforms.
And so between free to play gaming
and sports betting, starting all of us
into gambling addicts and meme stocks and
all that stuff, um, basically, it's another
set of betting vehicles.
So too often the world of crypto
and NFTs and so on is basically
an excuse to bet and gamble.
And these are very illiquid markets that
are easily open to manipulation.
So there's a lot of abuse and
we've seen all of it.
So I fell out of love with
it.
And we pivoted the company towards what's
now the Boulevard where we built Mastodon
app called mammoth.
And most recently I've been working on
an app called Supperclub.
So we've used that the funding from
Blog block and pivoted into the Mastodon
work I've been doing.
So talk about Mastodon.
What is it?
Uh, Mastodon is a decentralized social network
that looks and feels like an open
source alternative to Twitter.
Uh, and still still is.
And it has, depending on how you
grade, you could say it has a
million users.
You could say it has 10 million
users.
Um, and it is open source and
it is decentralized.
So anybody can set up a mastodon
server and communities self-govern and set up
their own, um, content rules and terms
and community.
Community moderates the content and you can
block people and decelerate.
And Truth Social was built on top
of Mastodon technology, and it was rejected
by the rest of the community and
the open source tradition and so on
and so on.
It is an open source alternative to
Twitter that has had a couple of
moments in the sun, the most recent
and biggest one.
After all the turmoil at Twitter with
Elon, Mastodon had a real moment in
the sun.
And what about just the user experience?
How did that differ from from, say,
a Twitter?
Oh, it's.
The same, but worse.
It's like a shitty version of Twitter
is the honest answer.
And now I'm going to get like,
you know, like a bunch of angry
comments.
Um, but but that's the truth.
It the problem with open source and
decentralization, it is very hard to build
a great user experience all the way
to the end.
And so with open source and decentralization,
you get infinite customizability, and the cost
of it is confusing user experiences all
over the place.
Um, and so as a practical matter,
a social network is a place.
It's a bar, it's a bunch of
people hanging out.
And then the question is, who are
you hanging out with and what's the
vibe?
And if you're hanging out with people
you like and the vibe is good,
that's a good social network.
That's a successful social network.
Um, and I think if you think
of a social network as a set
of technologies and features, well, we're living
in a world, it's technology's world, and
we just live in it, you know?
So so it is true that the
architectural choices that we make at the
lower levels of our stack really impact
what the world looks like, that we
build on top of it.
But at the end of the day,
a social network is a place.
And the problem with Mastodon is that
it's confusing and complicated, and you ask
people to choose a server, and people
don't know what a server is, and
they just want to go away.
And I feel like I learned that
lesson when we shipped Thunderbird back in
2005, you know, and Scott, who was
running Thunderbird, he knew that.
I remember doing trying to do marketing
for Thunderbird and telling them this is
a better email app.
And then I would ask them, what's
your current email app?
And they would say, my email app
is Gmail, right?
Like, people don't know the difference between
Google and Chrome like to this day.
Like I promise you, more than half
of the US population does not know
the difference between Chrome and Google.
That is the same thing to them,
you know?
And in 2005, people did not know
the difference between an email client and
an email service like Gmail.
That's that's what I use, you know.
And so we knew when we shipped
Thunderbird, it was like, I gotta explain
to people that it's an app and
you can use it to connect.
Oh my God.
You know, and so when you're talking
about that, you're already talking about the
sides.
The point for most people.
And so a social network is a
vibe.
And we focus too much on the
buttons and the features and not enough
on what is the place we're creating
here.
Um, or we do.
And it's a really tiny place for
a really specific group of people.
If we're trying to build a safe
room for a marginalized community, that's amazing
and that's important.
And Mastodon does an exceptional job at
that.
I am most interested in the fact
that, I don't know, 300 million people
are getting massive amounts of disinformation in
this election cycle, and it might just
swing the election right.
But young males under the age of
30 voting, you know, in too large
a proportion by 3% for Donald Trump,
right?
That's what drives me nuts, right?
So I really wish we had 300
million people on something other than Twitter.
And we do it's called threads and
so on and so on.
But that's what I'm most excited about.
And Mastodon is not given an answer
to that.
And they would say that's a feature,
not a bug.
For me, that's a bug.
I wish we lived in a world
where 300 million people were on Mastodon
today.
I think that would be a better
world.
Um, and, and the complexity of Mastodon
has gotten in the way of that.
Interesting.
Yeah.
But it also, it also just in
terms of your own cycle, you're almost
back to pirate radio and you're in
your own way.
Yeah.
I remember, I remember.
And so and by the way, this
is a personal priority thing, right?
Like the fact that there is a
safe place for marginalized community.
Right.
Like.
And there's many of them on Mastodon,
and they're safe and and I cannot
be abused here.
That's amazing and important.
Right.
And I have the privilege to not
have to worry about that as a
white male and all that kind of
stuff.
And that's true, right?
And so I don't mean to minimize
that.
I just mean to say, I know
me.
I want to see an alternative to
X with 300 million people getting massive
amounts of firehose misinformation, right?
And just no way of avoiding that.
Elon Musk, waves of misinformation.
That's right.
That's a personal thing.
Doesn't mean that Mastodon isn't doing right
by its community and doing really important
work for communities that really need it
and deserve it, and have their agency,
and they should set their own rules.
You know, that's great.
Um, this is a personal thing.
Um, what?
I, you know, the way that where
I prefer to focus my energy.
Um, but yes, it does bring me
back all the way to pirate radio.
I remember in the early, early days
of me being back on Mastodon posting
at like 10 p.m., my sister from
Belgium had sent me.
There was a like a 40 year
reunion of the the FM Brussels.
That was the name of the radio
station, the crew, you know, like the
talent, on air talent that they they
all came together, you know, 40 years
later and she sent me the Billboard
chart that I typed up when I
was 13 years old.
I was at Catholic school and we
Typekit a carbon copy thing at a
Jesuit school and they would use the
Jesuit guy would run his stencil machine.
And number one on the chart was
Jesus and the Mary Chain.
You know, and I think the Sex
Pistols were still still around and stuff,
and that was the kind of shit
that was on there, you know.
Um, and I was like, oh my
God, it's amazing.
There's all these signposts because I didn't
speak very good English, you know, and
I had to literally listen to the
radio and there was no internet to
spell check, you know?
Um, and, and I posted that thing
on Mastodon.
I was like, look at this.
This is like a top 50 chart
from from 1983.
And like, three minutes later, some person
in New Zealand had built a playlist
on YouTube of all those songs.
Like within three minutes I was like,
oh my God, it's just like it's
full circle.
Same thing.
It was the same people and the
same ethos and vibe, and it's what
I'm here for.
Oh, that is awesome.
You had mentioned Sub Club.
Do you want to talk a little
bit about that?
Yes.
Um, so, um, shipped mammoths, a mastodon,
more user friendly Mastodon clients.
and it's a good product and we
got really good response to it, but
it's just not viable at all.
Like nobody nobody wants that ain't self-sufficient
and nobody's funding that.
And Membership's not going to pay for
that.
So I needed to pivot to keep
the lights on.
Uh, I think it was the same.
Josh is like, sometimes you got to
go into cockroach mode, dude.
You got to go survive.
So I was like, well, how can
I keep I want to keep working
here because I like the cause.
I like the people that are here
and what we're trying to do here.
Uh, but I gotta keep the lights
on.
So I remember running into, um, uh,
Mike McCue and Eugene Roscoe from Flipboard
and Mastodon, respectively, and asking them, hey,
what needs building next?
And at the same time, I was
listening to Search Engine, which is my
favorite podcast, and Casey Newton and Ezra
Klein and all those folks, you know,
um, and and we were looking they
were looking at ChatGPT and generative AI
and what it's doing to the internet
and how it is accelerating the decline
of the open web.
And I was like, oh, here we
go again.
I know this story.
This is the story of Firefox and
open source, you know, and social networking
and all this stuff coming together.
Right.
And you can see the accelerating decline
and, you know, publishing just really being
struggling and laying off reporters and newsrooms
and all of this stuff happening.
And now there's all this.
And on the other side of it,
there's all the synthetic media and things
that summarize things you don't need to
go look up.
Da da da da da da.
I'm like, oh, wow.
The open web, you know, is, you
know, it is in severe decline.
And there's like an existential crisis here
about the open web, the internet that
I came here for, you know, whatever
it was, Eazel or Firefox, the promise
of anybody, anywhere in the world can,
you know, express their ideas and you
can rise to the level of your
talents and all this kind of stuff.
You can find your tribe, all of
these things.
Right?
It's all under it's all at risk
because of how a very small group
of people are just kind of, you
know, strip mining the internet.
Um, and if you look underneath Mastodon,
there is a set of protocols called
activitypub.
And activitypub is like social building blocks.
And so I remember listening to Eugene
and Mike, but also Ezra, uh, you
know, Casey Newton.
And it was like, well, the social
web is, you know, at risk and
in decline.
And Google has sort of like given
them sort of like one of the
core building blocks of the web that
we've been living in, as Google as
sort of the organizer and the indexer,
you know, and they're no longer doing
that.
That's no longer their first priority, right?
It's strip mining it and getting it
to Gemini is, you know, you don't
have to go.
That's that's your priority, right?
So, um, so looking at this landscape
and this future, that the downside of
this future that we are seeing, um,
Activitypub feels like maybe our last and
best chance to save the open web.
Um, so Mastodon is built on this
thing.
It's an app and it's got its
strengths and weaknesses.
And we just talked about that.
Underneath it there's a set of protocols
called activitypub.
And threads to some extent is betting
and built on that.
And there's some limited amount of interoperability
between threads and activitypub.
Um, Flipboard is on Activitypub.
You can federate your WordPress blog.
So there's a number of people that
are starting to interoperate and build on
top of Activitypub.
And so the question I asked is
like, hey, if we believe in a
future where there is a smaller open
web, it's kind of like the indie
web, and there is a small number,
a smaller number of independent publishers, like
for, for media, maybe it's Casey Newton,
maybe it's information, maybe it's The Verge.
Um, this is the right technology stack,
you know, a set of open protocols
that allow us to have direct connections
to our audiences to get that stuff,
to have social discovery like you used
to get it on Twitter.
But for me as a publisher, to
have to own, you know, my data
and to have a direct connection with
the folks that are reading my content
and that like my content, that's the
promise of Activitypub.
So the question is, how can I
help bring about that future where there
is a thriving open web on protocols
of an open web, kind of like
the next gen of SMTP and email
protocols, you know.
And so the idea was, hey, creator
economy and getting money in here is
a big requirement for for this to
take off.
Let's add money to the fediverse.
And so it's kind of like the
equivalent of like adding money to the
Fediverse.
So how can you have a premium
Twitter feed or premium Mastodon feed?
Can I take my WordPress blog and
have a paywall with some free content,
some paid content?
And you can you can follow all
of this stuff inside of Ivory.
That's that's a famous Mastodon client or
Flipboard.
So how can we add money to
this ecosystem.
This alternative ecosystem that I am convinced
is very important for the future of
the open web.
It's open source and an open protocol.
And and it's called activitypub.
That's great.
What exactly is the Fediverse.
That's that's that's starting to to come
up a lot in discussions.
Yeah.
Well, to purists the fediverse means activitypub.
And so the fediverse means mastodon and
a small number of other apps built
on top of Activitypub.
There is, um, there is a Reddit
alternative built on top of Activitypub.
There is a thing.
There is a TikTok alternative built on
top of of Activitypub.
There is a YouTube alternative.
They tend to have thousands and sometimes
tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands.
And Mastodon has millions.
But.
But there's a small number of apps
built on top of these activitypub protocols.
And to the more Narrow into narrow.
Definition.
The Fetih verse is a set of
apps built on top of Activitypub, and
then you might say we have bridging
to the Fediverse from threads, which is
the Twitter alternative run by meta.
That one is doing really well.
There's limited interoperability, so there's a bridge
between the fediverse and threads.
There's a bridge between the Fediverse and
blue Sky, which is another Twitter alternative
that's built on a set of other
protocols that are also open source.
Confusingly, my definition of the Fediverse is
much more liberal, but I don't like
that narrow definition of the fediverse because
I want to get to a billion
people, right?
Like, my definition of success is, you
know, it's about building safe places and
avoiding some of the pitfalls of the
bigger web.
But it's also about doing that for
100 million people or a billion people,
right?
And so for me, the fediverse is
activitypub anything that sort of is bridging
enough with it, you know.
And so for me, that includes the
fediverse includes blue Sky and anything else
built on the At protocol, the At
protocol underneath it.
Um, it includes threads which I gotta
squint a little bit and be in
a good mood to say that.
But but but but but threads.
Um, it includes, um, it includes RSS.
Uh, because you can we can easily
ingest anything that's on RSS.
We can make it show up in
Ivory and on Mastodon, and I can
support it with Sub Club and so
and so my definition of, of, of
the fediverse is decentralized technologies that bridge
well enough to activitypub.
And so the world of podcasting, if
I'm really in a good mood, I
would make an argument that podcasting is
as a citizen of the fediverse as
well.
That's probably a little bit of an
extreme position.
So maybe that's a bridge too far,
but it certainly is the ethos, right?
The the ethos of the open web
and open protocols.
And so you can listen to this
podcast in whatever podcasting client you prefer,
right?
That's the spirit to me of the
fediverse.
And we can bicker about sort of
where the definition ends.
But I'm excited about podcasting as one
of the things on the fediverse that
you can consume in Ivory or mammoth
or Flipboard and so on.
So I have a very liberal definition.
Well, that's really cool.
Are there any other projects that you're
working on right now?
Uh, no.
I'm working.
All of my energy right now is
on Subclip and a little bit on
mammoth.
And so Subclip is about adding a
creator economy.
So I'm trying to get entrepreneurs to
show up and start building things on
top of it.
So I'm trying to support premium content,
um, work with ghost, which is a
Substack alternative, a newsletter platform that's open
source and has is federating.
So it's becoming part of the Fediverse.
Um, I think allowing news and publishers
to thrive on the decentralized social web
is a.
That's an important cause and mission that
I'm very excited about, and I'm working
on that right now with Soap Hub.
Yeah.
What do you think?
What is your biggest fear about the
future of the internet?
Well, it's what we're seeing play out,
right?
It's a world where you have a
small number of massive technology platforms that
have that operate sort of like nation
states and like, you know, like X
is sort of like the best example
of sort of how that gets real
dark real fast.
Right?
Uh, and then also, um, the world
of generative AI that allows you to
sort of just ask questions and get
answers that are sort of safe enough,
but they have sort of a lowest
common denominator vibe.
Uh, it floods the internet with generic,
um, content that's low quality.
Um, and what gets lost is reporters
doing investigative reporting and putting years of
labor into work, you know, of journalism
and other kinds.
And what gets lost is, uh, people
connecting and having meaningful dialogue with other
folks, some of whom they agree with,
some of whom they disagree with.
Um, I love the promise of the
internet of we can find our tribe,
we can talk to people.
Anybody can publish and have their voice
be heard.
Uh, and I think that is at
risk as a result of the consolidation
of the tech space and the small
number of billionaires that are running it.
And as a result of LM that
is sort of strip mining content created
by the Commons.
And so how do we get there
to be a viable alternative?
And so maybe that ends up being
the difference between Spotify and vinyl records,
where more people are living in the
world of Spotify, but vinyl records, there's
more of them being sold every year.
Um, and so maybe it's not about,
um, beating OpenAI and Twitter.
I hate to say it, but maybe
it's about offering a viable alternatives so
that you can spend most of your
day relying on ChatGPT.
And llms and maybe hanging out on
Instagram and maybe threads.
Um, but here's a place where there's.
Authentic conversation between real people.
And here's a place where.
Journalists are able to do their work
and get paid a fair, a fair
wages for it.
You know.
Wow.
That's a great answer.
Um, I want to just ask you
a little bit about just the open
source community.
Um, do you feel like that there's
something different about people that, um, work
in open source that contribute to it?
Yes.
Uh, it it takes all kinds.
It's very it's diverse community and people
are there for different reasons.
And, you know, scholars, students, sometimes they're
there to put something on their, you
know, GitHub link on their LinkedIn and
so on and so on.
Right.
But but if I sort of want
to simplify it and sort of like
the two biggest cohorts, you know, that
I've sort of worked with in, you
know, across the years and projects, um,
it's engineers and non-engineers.
Right.
I'm a non-engineer.
Um, and so, uh, on the on
the on the engineering side, it it
overindexes on folks that are excited about
their technology that want to learn from
others that don't want to reinvent the
wheel, that don't mind you, that don't,
that aren't that aren't trying to squeeze
every little drip out of that lemon,
you know, and not trying they're not
trying to get the last dollar out
of their idea.
They're trying to explore their curiosity, um,
see it out in the world, build
on top of other people's work, advance
science and research, you know, and so
on and so on.
And then and if it becomes successful,
we'll find a way to make money
that's usually over there in there somewhere,
but in a good way, you know,
um, that's the spirit that I find
in Mastodon and that I found at
Mozilla and, and Linux in the GNOME
community and elsewhere.
Um, and then the Non-engineering folks that
are there, um, we tend to be
pretty lucky.
Um, and so we go back to
traditions of activism and social justice and
building a better world.
And, um.
And then when you look back 20
years in time so often, turns out
they were right.
We were right.
You know, whether it be gay marriage
or anything or any other social justice
movement.
Right?
Uh, and so it's my people.
Um, so, yes, I do find that
it that it organizes and overindexes on
on folks with those with those drives
building a better world and chasing our
curiosity and sharing it with folks.
Has it changed a lot since you
started?
I think so it's gotten more inclusive
and better for it.
Uh, and so I think that that's
the that's the thing that's been most
striking to me is I remember the
flame wars back in the back in
the Linux and GNOME days, and it
was all male and it was very
aggressive and it was very male.
Uh, it was sort of a very
male centric ethos around chasing curiosity and
hashing out differences.
And I operate very well in that
world, you know, because it's because because
I'm sort of that kind of, you
know, like like I'm a tech bro.
You know, it's sort of at heart,
it's true.
It's just it's just a fact.
Um, what's great about the new wave
of open source that is coming out
of the Mozilla tradition or the Mastodon
community?
I think we're a lot it's not
perfect, but it's a lot more sensitive,
uh, to the diversity, to seeking out
voices from, uh, underserved communities, um, to
making sure we're, we're building a culture
that allows folks to express themselves in
different ways.
And that and lets people talk that
don't thrive on sort of a in
the trolley world of, you know, of
the brunette of the, you know, of
the, you know, of the tech bros
and so on and so on.
So I think that's that's very different
than it was 20 years ago.
And it's not perfect and it will
keep getting better.
But, um, but it's great to see
that, you know, there's, it's more diverse
voices, greater respect for different approaches, um,
and different life choices.
Yeah.
What advice would you give to someone
aspiring to be in your field now?
What's my field?
Well, really the, you know, working working
in open source, but also as a
founder CEO, someone who is, you know,
generating a lot of ideas and and
projects.
How do I have these two things?
You know, like one of them is
like chase your curiosity.
And then I get annoyed when people
say that because there's like a privilege
in there, you know, like just your
curiosity, but chase your passion.
You know, I don't know, many of
us want to be pop stars and
stuff, you know?
And then you're probably not going to
be Taylor Swift, right?
And so telling people to chase their
curiosities can it can so often come
from a place of privilege, you know,
and then and then most people on
the planet can't afford that.
You know, they don't have that privilege.
And then many of us, if we
if we chase our passion, my passion
is surfing.
Maybe I don't know how I'm going
to make a living on that.
Um, um, so I'm nervous about that.
But it is what I have done.
Uh, and so I think for me,
um, and a generation of us, we
are born at a time and place
in history that's unique.
And if you're curiosity is around technology
and the world that that can shepherd
us into.
That's a good curiosity.
Uh, chances are you'll be able to
get funded and and make a living
for the next few decades.
So I do think that that if
you're a nerd and you like to
build stuff and you're interested in new
technology, um, follow your passion and good
things are probably going to work out.
It's probably not the worst advice.
Um, the mistakes I've made have been
when I spent too much of my
time thinking about the world people ought
to live in and the things people
should want, and not enough time solving
problems that are really bothering people.
And it's hard to fix for that
because I see Elon ruining Twitter and
I'm like, let's go make Mastodon better
because the world needs it, you know?
But but Firefox got mainstream adoption in
a way that Mastodon has not because
we had that normative thing around the
world.
The web ought to be open web
standards.
Don't give it to the evil monopolist,
all that stuff.
We had that right.
But also there was a problem.
This thing is stealing your passwords, you
know, if you're not careful.
Right.
And we're going to solve that.
Um, and so for those of us
that are imagining a better internet, you
got to spend 51% of your time
thinking about what problem are you solving
for, what specific customer, uh, and make
sure you don't under under address that.
And sort of where I failed is
by spending less than 51% of my
time worrying about that, you know.
Gotcha.
That's a good answer.
Um, last question that we're asking everybody
is if someone were to come across
this interview saying 100 years, you know,
what would you want the next generations
to know?
What would you want to tell them?
Oh, well, we believe that technology has
a lot of risks, you know, and
downsides.
But we also have faith, you know,
that technology can solve problems.
And then if we stay in the
driver's seat, um, that we can use
this technology to solve important problems and
that the spirit of the internet and
people coming together to build technology that
we that is solving problems that we
care about, that that's that that's going
to survive.
So I hope that that spirit is
going to be alive in 100 years.
And the same way that the spirit
of punk and pirate radio from 1970,
it's 50 years later, right?
Um, like I feel that I was
listening to a podcast by Chuck D,
um, uh, the rapper, uh, about the.
Clash.
And it helped me really see the
connection and why I felt like I
was listening to The Clash in 1980,
you know.
But to Public Enemy in 2002 or
something, right.
I was like, it's the same thing.
And so the Chuck D podcast helped
me sort of see that connective, that
connective tissue.
I'm hoping that 50 years from now,
we're going to see the connective tissue
between Mastodon and Activitypub and whatever the
cool thing is that is, that is,
that is that is in the spirit
of indie developers and power to the
people and using technology to level the
playing field and to have voices be
heard that otherwise would not be.
Well, that's a great answer.
Thank you so, so much, Bart, for
this interview.
It's been a pleasure and an honor
to interview you, and I hope we'll
be able to also just keep up
with what what's going on and do
do do another interview in a few
years.
So thanks.
I hope so.
This was great fun, Karen.
Thank you.
I'm going back soon.
Wait.
Hang on.
I'm going to stop the.
Stop it here.
I don't know if it's.